---
title: Pegen++ parser generator
date: 2023-07-18 22:00:00 +0300
author: Andrew Belyaev
---

This post is dedicated to the parser generator used in Bondrewd. It is
based on the [Pegen](https://github.com/we-like-parsers/pegen) parser, a
version of which is used in CPython 3.9+. Both Pegen and Pegen++ are written
in Python, however the target languages differ. Pegen generates a parser in
Python as well. Its version used in CPython generates C code, however it is
tightly coupled with CPython's internals, so it is not usable outside of it.
Pegen++ generates C++ code, and is specifically designed with Bondrewd's
internals in mind. It should, however, be feasible to convert it for use in
another C++ project with minimal effort.

As is evident from the name, Pegen++ operates on PEG grammars. A PEG grammar
is almost the same as a context-free grammar, except that all choices are
ordered. This effectively makes every PEG grammar unambiguous, which is a
desirable property for a parser generator. The generated parsers are
recursive-descent with packrat caching. This results in performance similar
to an LL(1) parser, while avoiding the issues of LL(1) grammars. Pegen in
particular also features special support for left-recursion, which is
otherwise an issue for most kinds of parsers. A lot of information about PEG
parsers in general and Pegen in particular are available in the
[PEP 617](https://peps.python.org/pep-0617/). Pegen++ differs from Pegen
mostly just in support for C++, but also in some other minor details. For
example, Pegen++ allows rules to have empty bodies, and also allows to specify
additional code to be added to the generated parser class.

Pegen++ isn't distributed as a standalone package due to being tightly coupled
with Bondrewd's internals. However, its source code is available in the Bondrewd
[repository](https://github.com/abel1502/bondrewd/tree/master/tools/pegen++).

While I'm at it, I should also mention another tool used in Bondrewd, which is
aptly named ASDL++. It is based on ASDL, which is also used in CPython. ASDL
is a language for describing abstract syntax trees, and a tool for generating
corresponding code. ASDL works with CPython's C representation of ASTs via
macros and functions. ASDL++ works with Bondrewd's C++ representation of ASTs
via classes and variants. ASDL++ also supports in-place declaration of aliases
and extension code. source code is available in the Bondrewd
[repository](https://github.com/abel1502/bondrewd/tree/master/tools/asdl++)
as well. 

Those tools, along with the grammar and AST definitions and some supporting
code such as the lexer and some AST utilities, constitute the part of Bondrewd
written so far. The next step is to implement the `ctime` language core --
the C++ representation of a compile-time object, the built-in objects with
self-referential definitions, and the compile-time evaluation engine. I'd
argue this is probably the hardest part to design (which is my excuse to have
been stuck on it for over a month already). I'll most likely dedicate the next
post to that, so stay tuned.

_On a side note, there's now an RSS feed for this blog, so you can subscribe to
it if you want to be notified of new posts. Also, to the select few people
reading this blog this July -- I love you, and thanks for the early support
of the language. Remind me to put you in a thanks list when I end up writing
one._
